This is why women leave academia        

It has been one year since UW released its report blaming me for the
sexual harassment in the systems lab. I thought I would write a recap
for the broader academic community that is not about my experience or
that of women in general, but about the broader systematic issues that
this incident revealed in academia. Despite cropping up over and over
again, these issues are largely unacknowledged. My one attempt to
address them in a [systematic way](https://csclimatesurvey.org)
fizzled because of lack of support from institutions (e.g., ACM) and
the emotional toll to myself from being repeatedly told that I was
wrong and unrealistic.

The UW situation highlights the issues and inequities in our system in
a way that I wouldn't have been able to. In many ways, it is a
qualitative case study of what happened to eight women in a lab with a
small number of bad actors and what happens when the faculty with
power and authority ignore the problems and side with the men.
Unfortunately, the same situation is replaying over and over again in
labs around the world, usually with a fewer number of women, who are
easy to dismiss. The UW situation was unique in that there were a
substantial (by academic standards) number of women, eight, and they
were exceptionally well read and articulate.  They also believed in
the ability of the department to hear their concerns and fix them (or
they would not have bothered complaining, which is more likely to
happen). And yes, they had an influential alum, me, backing them up
and encouraging them and telling them that they are entitled to a
better work environment.

Additionally, because a year has passed, we can track where the women
have wound up. In most cases, the women simply disappear and are
easily forgotten.  Their lab likely didn't have many or any women
before they arrived and simply returns to that state. The decision of
one or two women that decide to quit is dismissed as a personal
decision and not an issue with the broader system.  We lament how hard
it is to keep women in CS and academia, while patting ourselves on the
back for managing to recruit a woman in the first place and reassuring
ourselves that women just can't cut it in the high-stakes world of
academia.

The UW situation is both representative and unique in this sense
too. The letter written to the faculty by the women was precipitated
by a single woman quitting because of sexual harassment; however, once
the women started talking to each other, it seemed that they were
having the same experiences over and over again; that is, it seemed to
be more systematic than one woman leaving would suggest.  Thus, they
took the time off from their research and the emotional energy to
write a letter in good faith to those in charge.

What happened afterwards was a lesson in not challenging the
system. Not only did UW go after the women by subjecting them to an
investigation that set back all of their careers by at least a year,
it also went after me, their only advocate. While UW might not have
meant to make an example of them, it is exactly what they did. Now
women in the department know not to complain because it will cause a
year of gaslighting and harassment from the faculty.  I sent a FOIA
request for the faculty email because I legitimately was confused by
their animosity towards me. The emails revealed conspiracy theories
and demeaning language about me that were shocking. They also
threatened to and did take these conspiracy theories to my management
at MSR, which felt, again like they were trying to make a point about
speaking up for women.

More concretely, we can study what happened to the women. For
anonymity, I will use the designations from the HR report.

1. Alpha - struggling to graduate, likely will leave academia
afterwards, but unsure
2. Beta - rushed to graduate, original plan was to stay for postdoc
and interview but decided to leave academia
3. Gamma - Left to finish PhD at another university
4. Delta - Stayed at UW in another lab, may quit
5. Epsilon - Left to visit another university, likely quitting at the
end of the school year
6. Zeta - quit after her first year due to sexual harassment, returned
to industry job
7. Kappa - postdoc intending to interview for jobs, quit half way
through postdoc due to the situation
8. Chi - transferred to another university

Chi was interviewed for the HR report but not included because she was
a new student. Note that essentially all eight women left the systems
lab, not a single one was interested in staying after the
investigation.  If eight women left a group at a company, some
questions would be asked, but here there is no accountability or
reflection. Three women left for other universities, where hopefully
the situation is better but there is no guarantee that something
similar will happen again.  Beta experienced harassment in another lab
at UW, where she had already gone through the same experience but was
assured that the systems lab would be better.  While some of the eight
will finish their PhDs, it is highly unlikely that any of them will
become faculty.






So what are these systematic issues?

1. Survivor bias
2. Himpathy and both side-ism
3. Institutional betrayal
